The Glossarium Graeco-Arabicum
(Proposal for the Jahrestagung der Digital Humanities im deutschsprachigen Raum)
Applicants:
1) Yury Arzhanov
Contact: Ruhr-Universität-Bochum, Fakultät für Philologie, Sem. für Orientalistik,
Universitätsstr. 150, GB 2/34, Bochum, 44780 Deutschland; e-mail: yrarzhanov@gmail.com.
Scientific interests: Ancient translations of the Greek philosophical and scientific works into
Syriac and Arabic.
2) Torsten Roeder
Contact: Berlin-Brandenburgische Akademie der Wissenschaften, TELOTA, Jägerstraße 22/23,
10117 Berlin; e-mail: roeder@bbaw.de.
Scientific interests: Digital Humanities, Musicology, Italian Language and Literature.

The Project
From the eighth to the tenth century A. D., Greek scientific and philosophical works were
translated to large extent into Arabic. This activity resulted in the incorporation and
reorganization of the classical heritage in the new civilization which, using Arabic, spread with
Islam.1 The object of project Glossarium Graeco-Arabicum is to make readily available to
scholars the direct information which the Graeco-Arabic translations contain for several areas
of research. The Glossarium Graeco-Arabicum is hosted by the Ruhr-Universität Bochum,
starting with DFG funds in 1994, and was continued within the ERC project “Greek into Arabic ­
Philosophical Concepts and Linguistic Bridges” since 2010.2
Digital Resources
The database Glossarium Græco-Arabicum makes available the files of a lexical project,
intended to open up the lexicon of the mediæval Arabic translations from the Greek. 3 It
contains images of ca. 80,000 filecards which have not yet been published in the analytical
reference dictionary A Greek and Arabic Lexicon,4 and comprises Arabic roots from the letter
jîm to the end of the Arabic alphabet. The database provides search facilities for Greek words,
Arabic words and roots, as well as the authors and titles of the source texts. It is thus a possible
basis for generating entries in Greek-Arabic dictionaries. To extend the effectiveness of the
database, it is intended to link the data with the Perseus Digital Library and other online
resources as well.
Technical Aspects
The coexistence of several alphabetic systems within one web application brings to light a
number of phenomena and issues, as competing encoding systems, concurring writing
1

http://www.ruhr-uni-bochum.de/rubin/rubin-fruehjahr-2012/pdf/beitrag2.pdf (2013-08-27)
http://www.greekintoarabic.eu/ (2013-08-27)
3
http://www.ruhr-uni-bochum.de/imperia/md/content/orient/glossarium-graeco-arabicum.pdf (2013-08-27)
4
A Greek and Arabic Lexicon, Leiden: Brill, 1992ff.
2

directions, and characters of very different and individual types. Difficulties usually do not occur
in single alphabet environments, but when more than one writing systems are used parallely in
the same context, some seemingly trivial problems arise again. This concerns the
representation of research contents in the database (backend), the resulting website and its
input methods (researcher backend), and public access and search methods as well (researcher
frontend). While Unicode seems to be the universal solution, there are still some issues that
require complicated workarounds, or result in disadvantages for the user otherwise.

