‘Over-tagging’ with XML in Digital Scholarly
Editions
Elise Hanrahan, hanrahan@bbaw.de
NOTE: Obwohl ich mein Abstrakt auf Englisch geschrieben habe, kann ich den Vortrag gern
auf Deutsch halten.
This talk looks at the phenomenon of over­tagging (term created here) in XML, which consists
of exaggerated and unfocused tagging that concentrates on diplomatic characteristics. These
tags are used for the display of the digital edition text on the computer screen­­an especially
questionable result when digital facsimiles exist.

To what degree computer technology affects practices and theories in scholarly editing is an
open question. But whether or not we are in the midst of a revolution or simply experiencing a
change of tools, there are certain influences that can already be observed. One is the
availability of digital facsimiles combined with the use of XML.
How could digital facsimiles change online scholarly editions? Digital facsimiles challenge one
of the claimed purposes of a scholarly edition—the recreation of the original manuscript.1 This
aim, often strived for by means of a diplomatic transcription, is particularly prevalent in recent
editions. Elements of diplomatic transcribing can for instance be found in most German critical
editions from the last twenty­five years.2
Yet the question ‘How could digital facsimiles change online scholarly editions?’ was posed
because astonishingly the diplomatic method continues to be dominant. It is thus the
argument of this talk that online editions do not reflect this significant alteration in the
relationship between researcher and original source. Instead the same editorial method is
being used, and the primary new development is the use of XML instead of Microsoft Word.
Indeed not only do digital editions continue to be diplomatic, but the tendency has even
increased.3
1

It should be noted that this very strong focus on an ‘authentic’ recreation of the original handwriting is fairly
new in Editionswissenschaft, starting in the 1970s and becoming very dominant in the 1990s with editors like
Hans Zeller.
2
For a very concise summary of the take­over of the material­paradigma, see: Rasch, Wolfgang, Wolfgang
Lukas, and Jörg Ritter. "Gutzkows Korrespondenz – Probleme Und Profile Eines Editionsprojekts."
Brief­Edition Im Digitalen Zeitalter (Beihefte Zu Editio) 34 (2013): 99.
3
Elena Pierazzo addresses the popularity of digital documentary editions in: Pierazzo, Elena. "Digital
Documentary Editions and the Others." Scholarly Editing: The Annual of the Association for Documentary
Editing 35 (2014). Accessed November 10, 2014.
http://www.scholarlyediting.org/2014/essays/essay.pierazzo.html.

1

Structure of the Talk
I.
Arguments for why diplomatic transcriptions are no longer necessary when digital
facsimiles are available
II.
An examination of why diplomatic aspects in digital editions have surprisingly
increased instead of decreased
III.
Arguments and counter­arguments for continuing to transcribe diplomatically in digital
editions
IV.
Suggestions for alternative editorial priorities

I.

Digital facsimiles are a game-changer

There are two main arguments for recreating the original manuscript in the edited text (thus
using a diplomatic transcription), both of which online facsimiles challenge. The first is to
bridge the gap between the original manuscript and the researcher. Before digital facsimiles it
was quite possible that the researcher never set eyes on the original manuscript, which was
carefully stored away in a library or archive. The edition thus strove to offer the researcher an
objective depiction of the handwriting. Now, however, the researcher can look at the image of
the handwriting online, thus the edition must no longer bridge this gap.
The second argument for a diplomatic transcription is to preserve the manuscript. If anything
happened to the original source, the text of the edition could be used as a replacement.
Additionally the edition protects the manuscript from being over­handled, because it functions
as an authoritative substitute. There is however no longer a need to create a substitute for the
manuscript, because a high­quality image exists.
Despite these arguments, in praxis one finds digital editions still ruled by the diplomatic trend.
Why is this?

II.

The diplomatic-tradition and XML

There are two reasons for the prevalence of diplomatically­influenced digital transcriptions.
The first is that digital editions emerged at the same time diplomatic editing was the dominant
method for scholarly editions.4 It is therefore not surprising that the current method for print
editions was transferred to the newly emerging digital editions.
The second reason is due to the very nature of XML. In XML, unlike in Microsoft Word,
specifications for the visual presentation of the edited text are completely separated from the
documentation of the original source. Hence in XML the editor is no longer limited by the
4

That is, the end of the 1990s/start of the 2000s

2

space on the page for recording textual phenomena and can enter as many XML tags as
desired, allowing a theoretically endless documentation of the characteristics of the
manuscript. Combine this opportunity with an already diplomatic trend, and the result is a lot
of diplomatic XML­tagging, sometimes to an incredibly minute degree. This very real
phenomenon shall be called 'over­tagging'.
Over­tagging refers to an exaggerated amount of XML tags that do not pursue a specific
research question, but are in praxis only used for the display of the edited text on the screen.
Over­tagging could be for example using a character in the line below an indentation to mark
the length of an indentation, tagging the exact location and angle of marginalia, tagging
orthographical elements like the long s in German, or tagging line breaks that are not
semantically meaningful.
While there is nothing inherently wrong with tagging these kinds of textual phenomena, it is
important to ask, what is the purpose of these tags? Such tagging is especially problematic
when it comprises a large part of the XML schema. And one must add, no matter how detailed
a transcription is, it can't recreate the image of the handwriting and the vast amount of data
that the image carries. And not only is the usefulness of the results debatable, over­tagging
takes a great deal of time and energy. Other fundamental editorial tasks fall by the
wayside­­tasks such as editorial commentary, to name only one of many. There are many
other gaps to be bridged between the reader and original source besides the material gap. An
essential benefit to be gained from more reflective tagging practices is the time to focus on
these other editorial tasks.

III.

Counter-arguments: machine searchable and a reader-aid

One argument for over­tagging is machine readability. This means that tagged textual
information can be found in automated searches. Yet does anyone truly search for aspects
such as indentation size? An editor might argue: ‘Perhaps not now, but someone could in the
future. And what’s more, someone could discover that this seemingly insignificant textual
characteristic actually carries a semantic meaning’. Such an answer reveals the editorial
tradition that still strongly underlies digital editions today and is inseparable from diplomatic
transcribing. This is the philosophy that literally everything on the page could be significant.5
There are two responses to this. First of all search masks are currently not being made to
search for diplomatic characteristics. In praxis these tags are used for the display of the text
only. It is true that, if desired, search masks could be made for this purpose. It is also true that
5

This of course leads back again to the authenticity/materiality movement from Hurlebusch, Zeller and
others. For an example of such a perspective that does not directly lead to the solution of a diplomatic
transcription (but instead to digital facsimiles), see: Richter, Elke. "Goethes Briefhandschriften digital –
Chancen und Probleme elektronischer Faksimilierung." Brief­Edition Im Digitalen Zeitalter (Beihefte Zu
Editio) 34 (2013): 53­75.

3

it is impossible to prove that a certain aspect of a page is not meaningful. However, the
‘everything could be significant’ position is not a feasible editorial method. It is definitely not
the basis on which to build a well­functioning XML schema. In reality, at the end of the project
there exists a very large amount of information that is solely used for the display of the text on
the computer screen.
Another argument for over­tagging is that the resulting text is a kind of facsimile­reading­aid.6
This is however a problematic stance. Firstly, critical editions are not made primarily to be
reading­aids for facsimiles, although they can be helpful for this purpose. Critical editions are
editorial arguments and offer a readable edited text according to that argument. A
facsimile­reading tool is potentially very useful, but is something different than a critical
edition. Secondly, a diplomatic transcription was not conceived for this aim and is probably
not the best method. There are certainly much better ways to help guide a researcher through
a facsimile than simply mirroring the facsimile in the edited text, especially in consideration of
technological possibilities.

IV.

Different priorities for digital editions

Relinquishing over­tagging means more time for editors to concentrate on other aspects of
editing, such as commentary and semantic tagging (including not just person or place names,
but also more abstract themes, such as concepts found in the texts). There would also be
more time to tag the creative process of the author (such as capturing the layers of the text's
development by tagging crossed out/added words). There would be more time to enter meta
data, to link through standard IDs like VIAFs for persons and geonames for places, and to
simply to think about how to use the digital space to the researcher's best advantage.
In many ways, instead of reflecting on what doors technology opens for critical editions and
thus shaping technology to this end, editors have let technology define them, losing sight of
priorities in today’s digital world. For instance, an essential current challenge for digital
editions is to avoid the 'island' problem—single editions floating in the internet without a real
connection to one another. Minute diplomatic tagging does not address this problem
(standard IDs and meta data to some degree does). Yet it isn’t a question of what is important
and what is not­­all editorial tasks are important­­it is a questioning of appreciating what an
edition has to offer and carefully considering the energy invested and the benefits gained.
‘Over­tagging’ is perhaps a very small piece of the debate on digital editions, but it could point
to a general direction and is therefore worthwhile to consider in this context.

6

This idea is touched on in Pierazzo(2014), 4.

4

