An End-To-End Integration of Automatic Annotations into CATMA
Thomas Bögel∗

Marco Petris†
Jannik Strötgen∗
Michael Gertz∗
Institute of Computer Science, Heidelberg University
{boegel, stroetgen, gertz}@uni-hd.de
†
Institute for German Studies, University of Hamburg
marco.petris@uni-hamburg.de

∗

1

Introduction

Natural Language Processing offers solutions for
predicting linguistic annotations at different levels
of complexity. Thus, it seems obvious and – in general – a good idea to apply these methods to the Humanities in order to automate laborious manual annotations and to facilitate a deeper text analysis understanding. Apart from the purely technical aspect
of developing suitable models, however, additional
challenges for NLP in the Humanities arise: in order to be used as part of an analysis tool, humanists
often desire justifications and explanations of automatic annotations. Just implementing a black-box
approach, evaluating it intrinsically and returning
the presumably best results to the user is not sufficient. In this paper, we suggest a transparent way
of presenting the results of a NLP pipeline in a collaborative setting. This gives the user the possibility
to judge the results directly within an already existing annotation interface and potentially use them for
individual analysis tasks.
We will first present individual components that
are combined with each other, namely the collaborative annotation tool CATMA and UIMA as a processing pipeline for Natural Language Processing.
We will then show our end-to-end integration of
UIMA into CATMA and its advantages.

2

CATMA integration

CATMA1 is a flexible, collaborative annotation tool
for literary scholars. So far, it integrates three functional and interactive modules, namely the tagger,
the analyzer, and the visualizer. While the tagger
module is a graphical interface to allow the easy
1

Website: http://www.catma.de/clea

creation of manual annotations in texts using flexible tag sets (including feature structures, overlapping annotations, etc.), the analyzer component offers a wide range of possibilities to query a document collection or single documents, e.g., for frequently occurring patterns. Finally, the visualizer
module can be used to explore a document collection, e.g., by generating distribution charts of the
analysis results. In this paper, we present an extension to CATMA, which was developed in the context of the heureCLÉA project2 - the integration of
a UIMA-based text processing pipeline for the automatic creation of tag annotations created by natural
language processing tools.
UIMA (Unstructured Information Management
Architecture)3 is a wide-spread framwork for developing and using natural language processing
pipelines. One of its key characteristics is that it allows the easy combination of tools that have initially
not been built to be used together. All UIMA components rely on the same data structure - the Common Analysis Structure (CAS) - there are three types
of components: collection readers, analysis engines,
and CAS consumers. The collection readers task
is to access the source of the documents that are
to be processed and to initialize a CAS object for
each document. Then, the analysis engines perform
linguistic processing of the data and stand-off add
annotations to the CAS object. The subsequently
called analysis engines can access the annotation results of the earlier components, i.e., they can perform more complex tasks. Finally, a CAS consumer
performs the final processing of the CAS object.
2
3

http://heureclea.de/
Website: http://uima.apache.org/

Figure 1: End-To-End architecture of combining the collaborative annotation platform CATMA with the automatic
text processing pipeline UIMA.

In our case, the pipeline architecture is set up as
depicted in Figure 1. The Collection Reader accesses the documents directly from CATMA and returns annotation information back to CATMA. However, the actual key feature of our development is
that the user can directly access the automatic processing feature within the CATMA interface. That
is, the user can select the types of annotations that
shall be added to her document or document collection automatically. This significantly decreases
the boundary for users not familiar with applying
NLP tools for automatic processing of textual data,
i.e., for typical CATMA users who are often literary
scholars or students of the Humanities.
Nevertheless, our implementation is not a black
box solution that only adds annotations that the user
has to accept. In contrast, we are currently working
on integrating a user feedback interface that will allow the initialization of user parameters based on the
users feedback in the form of accepted or rejected
annotations.

basic linguistic phenomena is laborious, we are currently developing a machine learning system for predicting temporal signals. Figure 2 shows the possibility to create and directly inspect automatic annotations directly within the CATMA interface. With
one click, the prediction of our NLP pipeline for
temporal signals – or other annotations such as date
and time expressions (Strötgen and Gertz, 2013) –
can be shown. Note that the system output can easily
be compared to any manual annotation as the type
systems are completely independent. This flexibility allows scholars to focus on complex phenomena
of the text with the possibility of automating simpler
annotations. All automatic annotations are, however, non-obtrusive and completely changeable and
reversible to give the choice of the level of automation to the user.

3

Strötgen, J. and M. Gertz (2013). Multilingual and
cross-domain temporal tagging. Language Resources and Evaluation 47(2), 269–298.

Research Workflow within CATMA

The advantage of a direct integration of UIMA into
CATMA is best illustrated with an example: in order
to analyse the temporal structure of documents (such
as order phenomena), many linguistic aspects need
to be taken into account. Temporal signals, e.g., calendrical, deictic or relational temporal expressions
(Lahn and Meister, 2008), offer a hint for temporal
phenomena of order. As manual annotation for these

References
Lahn, S. and J. C. Meister (2008). Einführung in die
Erzähltextanalyse. Stuttgart: JB Metzler.

Figure 2: Screenshot showing automatic annotations within CATMA.

