


                    
                         On the history and heritage of the Vatican Apostolic Archive there is an extensive, though very fragmentary, bibliography. For an initial overview, see 
                        Religiosa archivorum custodia. IV Centenario della Fondazione dell’Archivio Segreto Vaticano (1612-2012)
                        . 2015. Città del Vaticano: Archivio Segreto Vaticano and Gualdo, Germano. 1989. 
                        Sussidi per la consultazione dell’Archivio Vaticano
                        . Città del Vaticano: Archivio Vaticano.
                    
                

                    
                         Today, the archive consists of more than 600 archival fonds from different types of institutions and covers approximately 85 linear kilometres of shelving.
                    
                

                    
                         For example the software 
                        Transkribus
                        : 
                        
                            https://readcoop.eu/transkribus/
                        
                        . 
                    
                

                    
                         The University of Roma Tre in collaboration with the Vatican Apostolic Archive in the frame of the project 
                        In codice ratio
                         (
                        
                            http://www.inf.uniroma3.it/db/icr/
                        
                        ) is developing a software for text recognition of the volumes of the 
                        Registra Vaticana
                        . This is an ambitious project, yielding excellent results, but unfortunately, due to the profound differences between medieval, early modern and contemporary writing systems, it will not be applicable to manuscript documents that are not written in the same style as the Vatican Registers. Firmani, Donatella, Paolo Merialdo, Elena Nieddu and Simone Scardapane. 2017. “In Codice Ratio: OCR of Handwritten Latin Documents using Deep Convolutional Networks.” In 
                        11
                        th
                         Italian Workshop on Artificial Intelligence for Cultural Heritage
                        ; Lastilla, Lorenzo, Serena Ammirati, Donatella Firmani, Nikos Komodakis, Paolo Merialdo, Simone Scardapane. 2022. “Self-supervised learning for medieval handwriting identification: A case study from the Vatican Apostolic Library.” In 
                        Information Processing and Management
                         59(3).
                    
                

                    
                         For example papal diplomatics and specific branches of palaeography, sphragistics, chronology and chronography as well as the history of the Papacy and the Roman Curia.
                    
                

                    
                         In this paper, we will refer to the Congregation of the Council as 'SCC', an acronym used in specialist literature and derived from the Latin name of the institution: 
                        Sacra Congregatio Concilii
                        .
                    
                

                    
                         The Council of Trent (1545-1563) was the 19th ecumenical council of the Catholic Church and remained in force until the 19th century. It was of central importance to the history of the Western world and beyond. Politically, the council attempted, unsuccessfully, to settle the rift between Catholics and Protestants that had arisen from Lutheran ideas by addressing important theological and ecclesiological issues (doctrine of justification, role of grace, existence of saints, doctrine of the sacraments, etc.). Within the Catholic world, the council constituted an important point of reference on a pastoral and juridical level. It is the council that remained in force the longest of all the councils recognised by the Catholic Church (307 years) and thus left an important imprint on Catholic societies, an imprint that is still visible today. 
                    
                

                    
                        This is due both to the very high costs of such an operation and other factors more related to source criticism such as the fragmentary nature of some of the cases decided by the SCC (some are divided into several phases also preserved in different volumes), the precarious state of preservation of some volumes, the extreme complexity of the structure of the processes (identification of the parties involved, the role of the cardinals who were members of the congregation, the institutions mentioned often related to canon law issues, the locations etc.) and the handwritings with which the documents were written (abbreviations, symbols etc.).
                    
                

                    
                        This phase of the work (2013-2019) was carried out by Dr. Benedetta Albani and Dr. Francesco Russo between 2013 and 2019 and was coordinated and financed by the Max Planck Research Group "
                        
                            Governance of the Universal Church after the Council of Trent
                        
                        " directed by Dr. Albani.
                    
                

                    
                         Vatican Apostolic Archive (AAV), 
                        Congr. Concilio
                        , 
                        Positiones
                        , 1-271.
                    
                

                    
                        Actors and their semantic roles (petitioners, members of the dicastery, lawyers and procurators, senders, addressees, sponsors etc.), institutions (dioceses, parishes, bodies of the Roman Curia, secular authorities etc.), places (spatial data, including coordinates, toponyms, etc.), temporal entities (events, dates, time periods), legal procedures, legal subject matters. For the moment, we have evidence of at least 8,000 petitioners, 1.500 places, 900 dioceses, 700 abbeys, 80 religious orders, 130 cardinals, 17 pontificates. These are preliminary results. Definitive data will be provided after the ongoing data cleaning process will be completed.
                    
                

                    
                        Biographical data of persons, metadata on the history of the mentioned institutions (dioceses, religious orders, churches, monasteries, abbeys), geographical coordinates of places and historical evolution of place names, bibliographical references, etc.
                    
                

                    
                         The limitation of the CIDOC model already shows in mapping on our data model, for example, the class crm: E8 Acquisition did not exactly fit our modelling notion, because the class was primary intended to design the legal process in the museum landscape, such as lending artwork to a gallery.
                    
                

                    
                         For example, some data were provided by the project 
                        Monasteries, Collegiate churches, and Convents of the Holy Roman Empire and neighbouring countries
                         (
                        https://adw-goe.de/germania-sacra/klosterdatenbank/datenservice/
                        ), by the Göttingen Academy of Sciences.
                    
                

                    
                         For example the 
                        Timeline JS
                         by Northwestern University Knight Lab (
                        
                            http://timeline.knightlab.com
                        
                        ) or 
                        MIT HyperStudio's Chronos Timeline
                         (
                        
                            http://hyperstudio.mit.edu/software/chronos-timeline/
                        
                        ) cannot visualize unclear and incomplete dates.
                    
                

                    
                        Almost all projects in geo-spatial visualization are based on GIS, which proposes a modern gaze on geography that does not allow to operate with unclear, uncertain and incomplete data in historical sense. For example, 
                        Esri Story Maps
                         and the 
                        Digital Humanities
                         projects (
                        https://collections.storymaps.esri.com/humanities/
                        ). On modern geography based visualization in R see Weinberg Eric. 2018. "Using Geospatial Data to Inform Historical Research in R." In 
                        Programming Historian
                         7.
                    
                

                    
                         The official website of vis.js library: 
                        
                            https://visjs.org/
                        
                        .
                    
                
            
                
Bibliographie
                    Berners-Lee, Tim. 2009. “Linked Data - Design Issues.” 
                        https://www.w3.org/DesignIssues/LinkedData.html
                    
                    Doerr, Martin. 2003. “The CIDOC Conceptual Reference Module: An Ontological Approach to Semantic Interoperability of Metadata.” In 
                        AI Magazine 24(3): 75. 
                        https://doi.org/10.1609/aimag.v24i3.1720.
                    
                    Firmani, Donatella, Paolo Merialdo, Elena Nieddu and Simone Scardapane. 2017. “In Codice Ratio: OCR of Handwritten Latin Documents using Deep Convolutional Networks.” In 
                        11
                        th
                         Italian Workshop on Artificial Intelligence for Cultural Heritage.
                    
                    Gualdo, Germano. 1989. 
                        Sussidi per la consultazione dell’Archivio Vaticano. Città del Vaticano: Archivio Vaticano.
                    
                    International Council on Archives
                        . 2000. 
                        ISAD(G): General International Standard Archival Description. Ottawa: International Council on Archives.
                    
                    Lastilla, Lorenzo, Serena Ammirati, Donatella Firmani, Nikos Komodakis, Paolo Merialdo, Simone Scardapane. 2022. “Self-supervised learning for medieval handwriting identification: A case study from the Vatican Apostolic Library.” In 
                        Information Processing and Management 59(3). 
                        
                            https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ipm.2022.102875
                        .
                    
                    
                        Religiosa archivorum custodia. IV Centenario della Fondazione dell’Archivio Segreto Vaticano (1612-2012). 2015. Città del Vaticano: Archivio Segreto Vaticano.
                    
                    Thalhath, Nishad, Nagamori, Mitsuharu, Sakaguchi, Tetsuo, and Sugimoto Shigeo. 2021. “Wikidata Centric Vocabularies and URIs for Linking Data in Semantic Web Driven Digital Curation.” In 
                        Metadata and Semantic Research, ed. Emmanouel Garoufallou and María-Antonia Ovalle-Perandones, 336–344. 
                        Metadata and Semantic Research. MTSR 2020. Communications in Computer and Information Science, vol 1355. Springer, Cham. 
                        https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-71903-6_31.
                    
                    Weinberg Eric. 2018. "Using Geospatial Data to Inform Historical Research in R". In 
                        Programming Historian 7
                        . 
                        https://doi.org/10.46430/phen0075
                        .
                    
                    Wilkinson Mark D., 
                        Dumontier, Michel, Aalbersberg, I. Jsbrand Jan 
                        et al.
                         2016. “The FAIR Guiding Principles for scientific data management and stewardship.” In 
                        Sci Data 3. 
                        https://doi.org/10.1038/sdata.2016.18
                        .
                    
                    Zhang, Zuopeng Justin. 2017. "Graph Databases for Knowledge Management." 
                        IT Professional 19(6): 26-32. 
                        https://doi.org/10.1109/MITP.2017.4241463.
                    
                
            
        